Multilingual Language Acquisition

Abstract: In this paper, we will be exploring the various hypotheses on how people acquire a second or even more, languages. Specifically, we will be looking at the models presented by various scholars that cover both the more nativist approach to language, as well as the more social-linguistic aspects. The main question that we will be addressing is, how do people acquire their non-native languages, and what factors have what kind of influence on this process? We will answer these questions through looking at evidence presented by Schumann, Singleton, and other researchers that have done experiments and conducted research into factor that affect language acquisition, such as age, cultural immersion, and other known languages. We will present data acquired from various studies and attempt to determine how much influence the various factors have, as well as try to determine an order as to the ‘importance’ of each of the variables that has been investigated.

1 Introduction

As anyone would imagine, there are many factors that play a part in the acquisition of a second or third language, including age and immersion among other things. The question then becomes, how much does each factor play a role in acquisition? And is there a factor that plays more of a part than others? We will be looking at the acculturation model presented by Schumann in 1986, the more sociocognitive approach with alignment presented by Atkinson et al in 2007, as well as the more traditional age based analysis provided by Singleton and Lengyel in their 1995 book. Through the analysis of each of these approaches, and other papers of similar approaches, we will attempt to determine if there is a most important factor in the process of acquiring a second or multi languages.

2 The Acculturation Approach

In this section we will be talking about both the acculturation. In his paper about the acculturation model, Schumann argues that ‘two groups of variables – social factors and affective factors – cluster into a single variable…’ (Schumann 1976: 379) and he argues that this is a ‘major causal variable’ and calls it the acculturation variable. Schumann describes acculturation to be the degree to which a learner socially and psychologically integrates with the target language group. He goes on to hypothesize that any learner will acquire the second language only to the degree to which they acculturate. There are two types of acculturation. In type one acculturation, the learner is socially integrated with the target language group and develops sufficient contact with target language speakers to acquire the target language, while also being psychologically open to the target language to allow intake of exposure. Type two acculturation has all of the factors of type one, but additionally, the learner either consciously or unconsciously desires to adopt the lifestyle and values of the reference group. Both types are sufficient for language acquisition, but we make the distinction to stress that while social and psychological contact is essential to acculturation, adoption of the lifestyle and values of the target language group is not necessary. When two groups are in contact, but speak different languages, invariably it emerges that one of the groups is the 2LL, or the second language learning group, and the other becomes the target language group. There exist social factors that either promote or inhibit contact between the groups, thus affecting the degree to which the 2LL group acculturates, which in turn affects the degree to which the group will acquire the target language. The social factors presented by Schumann are social dominance patterns, integration strategies, cohesiveness and size, similarity between cultures, attitude, and intended length of stay. Each of these will affect the degree to which the two groups will interact, thus affecting the degree to which the 2LL will learn the target language.

Social variables are more concerned with the learning of languages by groups of people. Affective variables relate more to the learning of language by individuals. An individual may learn under unfavorable social conditions, or may not learn under favorable social conditions. Here, the psychological variable affects acculturation and hence second language acquisition. The affective factors include language shock, cultural shock, motivation and ego permeability.

In what can be called language shock, it can be noted that many times, when learners attempt to speak a second language, they fear that they will appear comic. “He compares the use of a second language with wearing fancy clothes. The adult learner may want to wear his fancy clothes, but he also fears criticism and ridicule. The child, however, sees languages as a method of play and finds communication a source of pleasure.” (Schumann 1976:382). Thus the children enjoy wearing their metaphorical ‘fancy clothes.’ Similarly, adults often question whether their words actually reflect their intent. Children are less worried about this. The more child-like characteristics the adult retains, the more likely they are to have an easier time learning to speak a second language.

“Cultural shock can be defined as anxiety resulting from the disorientation encountered upon entering a new culture” (Schumann 1976: 383). When a learner moves into a new culture, they find themselves in a very dependant states. As a result, the activities that were once routine in their previous culture require a great deal of energy in the new environment. This causes disorientation, stress, anxiety, and fear, and the resulting mental state may not be receptive of the new culture and divert energy from second language acquisition. In this state, in an attempt to find a reason for the disorientation, it is possible for the learner to reject themselves, their own culture, and everybody else. “Under such conditions the learner is unlikely to make the effort necessary to be become bilingual.”

Motivation is the reason for which the learner is attempting to learn a second language. There are two motivational orientations for second language learning which have been identified by researchers – an integrative motivation and an instrumental motivation. An integrated learner wants to learn the language to be able to meet with, talk to, and in general, interact with the speakers of the target language whom they both value and admire. An instrumental learner is one who has little interest in the people who speak the target language, but want to learn a language for more utilitarian reason. “It has generally been thought that integrative motivation is the more powerful of the two because it implies a desire to integrate with speakers of the target language” (Schumann 1976: 383). The level to which they intend to use the language affects the level to which they need to integrate. However, recent research indicates that the effectiveness of a particular motivational orientation to be proficient in a second language varies according to setting.

All this culminates in the major hypothesis here; that the level of acculturation is directly correlated with the level of acquisition of the second language. Initially, it was found that for learner of English as a second language, there was a relatively low association between English proficiency and overall acculturation. Stauble offers two reasons for this. The sample set was small, and there was principled basis for weighing the various aspects of acculturation (it was suggested that the influence of each factor could vary by individual). Schumann concludes that “the Acculturation Model is a conceptual framework which permits the interpretation and understanding of success or failure in SLA in various contact settings.”

3 The Age Factor

As anyone would assume, the age at which exposure to a language begins heavily affects the acquisition of a second language. The existence of a ‘Critical Period’ for second language acquisition has been hypothesized. This hypothesis can be summarized as follows:

During development there are periods of special sensibility related to particular elements in the environment towards which the organism is directed with an irresistible impulse and a swell-defined activity. These periods, which help the organism to acquire certain functions or characteristics are ephemeral. In language, above all else, the transitory sensitive period is vital… (Breathnach 1993: 43)

It has been consistently found that with instructed second language learning, the pupils who are given early exposure to a second language and then integrated into a class with pupils without early experience do not maintain a clear linguistic advantage over their peers. The younger=better in all circumstances found in classical wisdom is too simplistic. Everything points the situation being much more complex than that view. The younger=better in the long run version of the Critical Period Hypothesis needs to be taken in the perspective of general tendency and not absolute law (it has been shown that an early start in a foreign language is neither necessary nor a universally sufficient condition for the attainment of native like proficiency).

There has been analysis of second language acquisition at the higher level in terms of age. It has been shown that (1) adults proceed through the early stages of syntactic and morphological development faster than children and (2) older children acquire faster than younger children. However it has also been shown that (3) acquirers who begin natural exposure to second languages during childhood generally achieve higher second language proficiency than those beginning as adults (Krashen et at 1979: 161). However, data in regards to phonological and lexical acquisition was inconsistent and difficult to interpret. In any case, it is clear that any age related advantage in the morphosyntactic development in a second language is only a general tendency. In terms of phonological development, the research has show more marked results. For short to medium term retention, studies have mixed findings, with some studies showing an advantage for young beginners, and other studies showing the opposite. However, in an English speaking acquisition of Dutch over a long term, there were more significant results. The experiment we will be referring to had both cross sectional and longitudinal components. The participants were tested on both their reception and production of Dutch words over a period of about 6 months. “The cross sectional component showed a linear improvement of scores with age. The longitudinal component, on the other hand, showed an initial advantage for older subjects, but a rapid catching up by the younger learners” (Singleton et al 1995: 8). Other long-term naturalistic studies confirm this; the earlier immigrants arrived, the more likely they were to end up sounding like natives. It should be noted, however, that due to the general tendency of morphosyntactic development, there exist late arrivals that behave like early arrivals. 
The existence of universally shared features does not necessarily mean that these features are pre-programmed in the brain. It is more likely that these features arose independently from the need for a way to express similar (or non similar) situations or objects. That is, the similarities are merely a coincidence arising from a shared most efficient communication method. Levinson argues that the ability to learn language is innate, but not the structure or the grammar of language. He backs his claim on the fact that there are a very limited number of features that could be considered so called ‘language universals,’ and that language structure, were it innate, would not have the flexibility needed to be adaptable enough for human evolution. If the similarities across languages were indeed a byproduct of efficient communication, we would see very similar structure across many languages, as well as languages that are completely different; possibly from the influence of the environment, one group’s most efficient route of communication was not the same as the next group’s way.
On an unrelated note, I believe that it is possible that some of the ‘similarities’ we see actually arise from ‘translation.’ In order to classify a language, we have to understand that language. But a lot of the language is lost in translation. Such as the example you gave in class about the word for ‘love’ in Hup, and as I have run into trying to translate Korean, a lot of the feel of a particular word or phrase is ‘lost in translation.’ What is to say that this ‘structure,’ or at least part of it, isn’t also lost in translation? In translation we try to classify the structures of other languages into something that we understand, ie, our native language categories. The point I’m trying to make here is that we may see what we think is widely shared language features, when in fact, the features that we are relating to each other are actually unrelated. If this is true, it would almost certainly prove that language is not innate. If it was innate, and the case I described above was true, that would mean that someone born without the correct innateness to learn a particular language would never be able to communicate in that foreign language. However, clearly this is not the case. Again, in this case, the similarities across language would originate from trying to communicate with people speaking foreign languages in terms of their language. Any other similarities can be attributed to coincidence arising from experience similarities.
Pinker’s point in comparing human language capacity and the bat’s echolocation is that both are not explicitly taught to the newer generation by the previous. He argues that both are pervasive instinctual abilities learned by the respective species; every being in the species learns the afore mentioned abilities. He also argues that both abilities are absolutely required for the respective species survival. While it is true that language and bat echolocation is almost equally pervasive and critical, it is also true that there are distinct differences between the two. Human language is extremely diverse in that it is used not only to convey information, but there are many different languages and sounds, and speakers of one language are foreign to other languages. Bat echolocation is used solely by the individual bat in order to locate objects, but not to convey information to other bats, and falls in a much smaller pitch range. Simply, human language is not only much more social ability, and thus has the adaptability that the bat echolocation does not share, but it has a complexity that is not present in echolocation. There is also evidence that children that are not exposed to any languages early have difficulty developing the ability to communicate clearly. This poses a contradiction to Pinker’s view of innateness in that if the ability was truly innate, it would also materialize in this isolated environment.

Question 5

One well established example of linguistic diversity is sentence structure. Speakers of English are very familiar with a subject-verb-object style of structuring sentences. However, as discussed in class, speakers of Hup use a subject-object-verb style of sentence structuring, while speakers of Korean and Japanese use more of a subject-v-object-erb kind of structure. What I mean by splitting the verb in the previous example is that the sentence is structured such that these two positions contain length respective importance parts of the verb. Again, if this structure was largely innate in humans, a child born to native speakers of one language would have difficultly learning or understanding another language. This is clearly not the case, as I can personally attest. Evans and Levinson argue that what is innate is not the structure of a language, but more the ability to learn and discern that structure for oneself. Mampe supports this hypothesis. They found that the environment that a child is carried in has already affected their cry by the time they are born. Kuhl also supports this. They found that linguistic experience alters phonetic perception in infants. We can extrapolate from the article that the infants are not born with their altered phonetic perception.
To support their claim that claim that the metaphor “health is up’ is deeply ingrained in out language and thinking, Lakokff and Johnson give example of phrases that are commonly used in our every day language that stem from this ‘assumption.’ Some of the examples given in their paper are “at the peak of health; came down with the flu; dropped dead,” among others. If one is “at the peak of [their] health,” in common English, we are referring to the fact that they are in their best condition, without being hampered by disease or other blights. To say that someone “came down with the flu” means that they have caught the flu, and will be performing at non optimal capacity. And when we say that someone ‘dropped dead,’ it means that they are dead, and we use ‘dropped to indicate that they have ‘fallen.’ This at least partially supports the idea that our thinking is crucially embodied. The idea that our thinking is embodied means that the way we think crucially develops from the way we experience things with our body. Mark Johnson proposes image schema as a way that embodied experience manifests at the cognitive level. “These are rudimentary concepts like CONTACT, CONTAINER, and BALANCE, which are meaningful because they derive from and are linked to human pre-conceptual experience.” If the mind were not embodied, we would not have these concepts as we would have no way to even get the idea of such concepts. Metaphors like ‘health is up’ is a direct result of our physical experience, ie serious sickness forces us lie down, and thus, conversely, if we are not sick, we are not forced to lie down, and thus are up.

Question 2
A frame, according to Lakoff, refers to the things that we prepare to think from hearing or reading a particular word or phrase. Basically, the frame colors the window with which we look outside. Frames are useful in political discourse because they allow a party or a politician to convey their message such that it is hard to disagree. One example of political framing was when the White House started using the phrase “tax relief.” This invokes the metaphor that ‘tax’ is a burden, and they are taking this burden away, thus ‘relief.’ By dictionary definitions, relief is defined as “the feeling that comes when something burdensome is removed or reduced,” and tax is defined as “an imposed financial charge or other levy upon a taxpayer.” Clearly, literally speaking, it is quite impossible to relieve tax. However, the way we have word meanings is more encyclopedic than dictionary. Thus taxes, since they stress us financial, are seen as a burden, and a burden can be relieved.

Question 4
Artful deviation occurs when an expression is different from what one might have expected, but is not rejected as nonsensical or faulty because the deviation occurs at the form level, but doesn’t change the content of the message. Artful deviation helps the advertising by allowing advertisers to mask (or hide) things about their product that could be construed as negative, while simultaneously allowing them to make their product memorable. It can roughly be divided into ‘schemes,’ which emphasize exaggerated regularity, and ‘tropes,’ which emphasize exaggerated irregularity. One example of a scheme would be the Head On advertisements, which used a rigid repetition of the message “apply directly to the forehead” in order to make the product memorable. Conversely, EA ran an ad for their game, Dead Space 2, which claimed that “your mom hates this game.” This clearly goes against the usual situation of parental approval for a game, but as a result, it makes it more memorable, while playing up its weak point (parental disapproval). Both advertising and poetry make heavy use of metaphor. While both advertising and poetry use metaphor to invoke a frame, advertising uses this frame to try to push their product and hide negative aspects, whereas poetry uses the frame to try to evoke deeper emotion. Both also make use of repetitive tactics, such as alliteration or rhyming, to increase memorability. However, again, advertising uses this so that you are more likely to buy their product next time you go shopping, while poetry tries to spread its message through it.

Question 5
By making the statement “biology proposes, but language and culture disposes,” Foley is trying to say that there are inherent things in our biology, or across every person, which shape the way we think. However, over time, due to difference across language and culture, the expressions of that universal biology become varied, and some expression lost or gained completely. The relation that ‘good is up’ is relatively common across languages. This is from the fact that if someone is not healthy, they are most likely to spend a lot of time in bad, lying down. Conversely, that would mean that one that is in good health would be up and about. Clearly, we can see here where ‘good is up’ comes from; a biological standpoint. Time is money is also a phrase that is well known, at least to speakers of English. Clearly, from a biological point of view, we have to do something to accomplish something, and doing anything takes time. However, the specific phrase ‘time is money’ (I believe) is rooted in American culture, and the fast paced life stemming from Wall Street. The way it looks, over on Wall Street, every second one wastes is a second that could have been money. Also, many people are paid by how long they work, and thus the advent of the clause that “time is money.” Also between languages, there are concepts that are similar, but still have different overall meaning and associations, such as the English and Cree definitions for the word ‘smart.’ Both the English smart and the Cree smart have the same general concept of meaning ‘cognitive competence,’ The Cree ‘ka-gi-ta-wen-tam’ is rough translated to ‘wise’ and has connotations of good thinking. The Cree word for smart, ‘ki-ken-da-so,’ means more a school smart, and is further from the good-thinking group of words. The English smart has stronger connections to meaning that one thinks well. The difference in approximate meaning arises from the difference in culture. In the Cree culture, traits such as being respectful and having a good sense of direction is valued over having school smarts, whereas in English speaking countries, the possession of more knowledge is considered more important, and valuable to survival. Thus we can see the influence of both biology and culture on the Cree and English ‘smart.’ From this, we can extrapolate to see how Foley’s statement can relate to how words link up to categories. We can see, from the linked words to smart in Cree and English that many categories and associations come from groupings of words that are closely associated, such as words that would aid survival, or words that would make one socially acceptable.

Extra Credit
The connectionist approach states that language is not modular, but rather spread throughout the brain, closely related to other cognitive functions. It is generally agreed that the truth is somewhere between these two extremes, ie it is not fully modular, but is not fully distributed either. A strictly modular approach would be incompatible with Evan’s and Levinson’s assertion that language is a “recently evolved biocultural hybrid.” A modular brain would not be able to generate ideas that were hybrid between the culture and language.
Question 1
From the time we are born, or even from before we are born, the language that we hear and learn is ingrained into our brain. Everything we see, touch, smell, taste and hear are all given mental shape by the language which we perceive them in. Since we tend to think in our native language, and in terms of structures that our native language can dictate, it stands to reason that it would be difficult to think about structures that cannot be expressed in the native tongue, or the language in the brain. Put simply, if you only look at the world through rose colored glasses, you will never develop the concept of blue. This narrowing of one’s field of vision is detrimental to linguistic research. With a narrowed field of view, linguists make assumptions that are supposedly based in fact, but are overall, erroneous, which would result in a much less diverse view of languages. For example, in Standard Average European languages, orientation is space tends to be described from the observer’s point of view, with references such as right, left, in front of, behind, etc. Due to this, it was thought that special orientation cognition was universal and based off the planes of the body. However, it was later discovered that speakers of Guugu yimithirr did not use a relative orientation system, and instead used an absolute system, using phrases functional equivalent to the English north, south, east, and west. Further experimentation revealed that speakers of Guugu yimithirr were better than speakers of SAE languages at tasks involving absolute orientation and navigation. With the previous assumptions, linguists would never have been able to conceive languages that used such a system, restricted as they were by their views from studying SAE languages. It is also argued that this is not done at a conscious level. We get into what Whorf calls ‘habitual thoughts,’ which basically dictate how we think from how we have thought in the past. The same way that water flowing over the same path will carve out a path, our thoughts get ‘canalized’ from ‘practice.’

Question 2
Levinson tested spatial language and cognition of ‘table top’ space to see how various languages coped with describing the space. His experiment consisted of memory and description games, and it revealed 3 types of linguistic frameworks used to describe space. The three systems he discovered were the relative system, the absolute system, and the ‘intrinsic’ system. The relative system was seen in English, Dutch, Japanese, and other related languages, and involves the observer describing a scene with relation to their own body’s spatial orientation. The absolute system was seen in Guugu Yimithirr and other Australian languages, and involves description relative to absolute space, or not relative to the observer’s body. The ‘intrinsic’ system was seen in Mopan Maya and Kilivila, and involves spatial descriptions relative to some feature or the ground, with no external reference points. After these three systems were isolated, they ran another experiment to determine if there was a cognitive effect from these various systems. Subjects were shown a line of three unique objects, turned around 180 degrees, and asked to reproduce the line of objects. The results showed that speaker of languages that used a relative system tended to recreate the order, but such that the line was oriented to their left to right perspective. Speakers of languages that used an absolute system also recreated the order correctly, and the orient of the line was unchanged relative to the cardinal directions. Speakers of languages that used an ‘intrinsic’ system ordered the object correctly, but the line orientation was seemingly random. The line orientation was closely correlated to the spatial description system used by the subjects’ native language, which would suggest a linguistic basis. It has been suggested that these differences may have been caused by differences in culture and/or environment. Even so, it is thought that language at least plays some role. Levinson presents us with three more possibilities for explaining which system is used, human genetic diversity, climate/ecology, or convergence through communication, the last of which would suggest a linguistic basis. The genetic diversity argument is unlikely as there are large variations within a community, close communities don’t share the same system, and the system one uses is the system of where they are raised (which suggest some linguistic or cultural basis). The ecological basis also seems unlikely, as people’s from similar environments do not always share the same system. This leaves the convergence through communication theory, which seems the most likely explanation. People needed a way to communication directions with each other effectively, and thus the languages ‘canalized’ into using a common system.

Question 3
Berlin and Kay ran a study on color cognition across cultures with various languages. Since the coding of color tends to vary considerably by language, and the color spectrum fades gradually from one color to the next, this makes it a very testable topic. One expectation they had going in to the experiment was to find ‘focal’ colors closer to the ‘center’ of a given color division. However, they found that focal colors tended to be relatively consistent across languages. They also found that the number of color divisions a language had was indicative of what color divisions they had, starting with black/white to red to green/yellow to blue to brown to others. It is argued that the conception of color is universal due to the fact that we, as humans, share the same vision apparatus. However, in a later experiment run by Davidoff and Berinmo, there was clear evidence that people remembered were able to better remember the distinguishing features between colors between colors that were across the borders of the divisions drawn by their language’s color divisions. They ran a second experiment in which they taught subjects new colors boundaries, and had the same relative findings, which would suggest that language plays some role in color conception. The two findings appear to contradictory at first sight, but upon closer inspection, may be able to work together, although not in entirety, as what the focal colors are seem to vary. However, if we make the assumption that all humans share the same general biology, we can assume that from the time people are born, they share a common ‘view’ of color, which gives immediate shape to their thoughts, and is thus universal. However, over time, as a language becomes learned, ‘though grooves’ take over and categorize color, making it language relative.

Question 4
One conclusion suggested by the oos/sou experiment is that language does have an influence on thought. When the oos/sou distinctions were assigned to animates with predictability, inanimates with the same marking were more strongly associated with the corresponding gender, even when taught to speaker of English. This would suggest that language has a relatively predictable influence on inanimate cognition. When they retested after scrambling the oos/sou associations so that there was no predictability in the animate markings, they found that there was no change in the descriptions of the inanimate objects. This leads to the second conclusion, that in order for there to be some semblance of a cognitive effect of male/female markings, there must be predictability in the markings of corresponding animate nouns. I predict that the cognitive effects of the oos/sou experiment are similar to the masculine/feminine distinction in speaker’s native languages. As the speaker’s native language has more ‘practice’ and may contain different associations than the oos/sou fake distinction, it is likely that it would carry more weight, even when thinking about a given inanimate in another language.